a) Heraclitus (520 - 460 BC)
Heraclitus was a famous dialectician in ancient Greece. Unlike the Miletus philosophers, Heraclitus believed that it was not water, apeiron, or air, but fire that was the source of all things. "Everything transforms into fire and fire into everything, just like exchanging gold into commodities and commodities into gold." Fire is not only the basis of all things but also their origin. "The death of fire - is the birth of air, and the death of air is the birth of water, from the death of water comes air, from the death of air - fire, and vice versa" . The universe itself was not created by God or some mystical supernatural force. It "forever has been, is and will be an eternal fire that is constantly burning and dying". Likening the entire universe to an eternal fire, Heraclit approached a materialistic concept that emphasized the eternity and immortality of the world.
In the eyes of Heraclitus, everything in our world changes, moves, and develops continuously. Heraclit's immortal thesis: "We cannot bathe in the same river twice."
Heraclitus acknowledged the existence and unity of opposites but in different relationships. For example, "no matter how beautiful a monkey is, it is still ugly if compared to a human". The universe is a unified whole, but within it there are always struggles between opposing things and forces. Thanks to those struggles, there is the phenomenon of one thing dying and another being born. That makes the universe constantly develop and grow forever young. Therefore, struggle is the kingdom of everything, the law of development of the universe. The struggle between opposites itself always takes place in a certain harmony.
b) Democritus (about 460 - 370 BC)
Democritus is the best representative of ancient materialism. Prominent in Democritus's materialist philosophy is atomic theory.
Atoms are particles of matter that cannot be divided anymore, are completely tiny and cannot be perceived visually. Atoms are eternal and unchanging, nothing happens anymore. Atoms have countless shapes. According to Democritus's concept, things are created by atoms bonded together. The diversity of atoms creates the diversity of the world of things. Atoms on their own do not move, but when combined together to form objects, they make objects and the world move continuously.
The soul, according to Democritus, is also a form of matter, made up of special atoms that are spherical, flexible like fire, have great speed, are always moving and produce heat that makes the body excited. and movement. Therefore, the soul has an important function which is to give the body the beginning of movement. Metabolism with the external environment is also a function of the soul and is carried out through the phenomenon of human breathing. Thus the soul is not immortal, it dies with the body.
Democritus divided human cognition into cognition provided by sensory organs and cognition provided by reason.
Perception brought about by the sense organs is a type of perception that is obscure and does not bring the truth. And rational cognition is cognition through judgment and allows reaching truth, because it shows that the origin of the world is atoms, the diversity of the world is due to the different arrangements of atoms. .
Democritus had progressive moral views. According to him, human qualities do not lie in words but in deeds. People need to act ethically. Human happiness lies in intellectual ability, mental ability in general, the pinnacle of happiness is becoming a wise man, becoming a citizen of the world.