c) Plato (427 - 347 BC)
Plato was an objective idealist philosopher. The highlight of Plato's idealist philosophical system is the doctrine of ideas. In this theory, Plato introduced the concept of two worlds: the world of sensible things and the world of ideas. According to him, the world of perceived objects is not real or correct, because things are constantly being born and lost, always changing and moving, and there is nothing stable or lasting in them. , complete. The world of ideas is the world of non-sensual, intangible things, the world of truth and truth, and perceived objects are only shadows of ideas. Human perception, according to Plato, is not a reflection of perceived objects of the objective world, but is a perception of ideas. The world of ideas precedes the world of sense objects, giving birth to the world of feelings. For example: tree, horse, water are born from the supernatural concept of tree, horse, water. Or when we look at things and see them as equal, it is because in our minds we already have the idea of equality.
From the above concept, Plato introduced the concept of "existence" and "non-existence". "Existence" according to him is what is immaterial, what is recognized by supernatural intelligence, is what has the first nature. And "non-existence" is matter, which is secondary to non-material existence.
Thus, Plato's doctrine of ideas and existence has a clear objective idealism.
Plato's cognitive theory also has an idealistic nature. According to him, knowledge is something that exists before the things we perceive and is not a generalization of experience in the process of perceiving those things. Therefore, human perception is not a reflection of things in the objective world, but is only the soul's process of remembering and recalling things forgotten in the past.
On that basis, Plato classified two types of knowledge: completely correct, reliable knowledge and obscure knowledge. The first type is conceptual knowledge, the soul's knowledge before entering the body and gained through recollection. The second type of confusion between right and wrong is knowledge received through sensory perception, where there is no truth.
Plato's concepts of society are expressed centrally in the concept of the ideal state. He criticized three forms of state in history and considered them bad forms. Firstly, the state of kings is built on the desire for wealth and fame, leading to robbery. Second, a military state is a state of the wealthy few oppressing the many, a state of opposition between rich and poor that leads to crimes. Third, a democratic state is a bad state, power belongs to the majority, and the opposition between rich and poor in this state is extremely harsh.
In the ideal state, the existence and development of the ideal state is based on the development of material production, the harmonious division of occupations and the resolution of conflicts between social needs.

d) Aristotle (384 - 322 BC)
The founders of Marxism considered Aristotle to be the most encyclopedic of ancient Greek thinkers. His philosophy, along with that of Democritus and Plato, created the highest stage of development of Greek philosophy.
As an encyclopedic mind, Aristotle studied many scientific fields: philosophy, logic, psychology, natural science, history, politics, ethics, and aesthetics.
Aristotle's criticism of Plato is an important contribution to the history of philosophy. Especially the criticism of Plato's theory of ideas.
According to Aristotle, Plato's idea is not beneficial for human cognition, because it belongs to the other world - a non-entity, so it is not beneficial for explaining knowledge about the things of this world. The world around us, based on it, humans cannot perceive the outside world.
The value of Aristotle's philosophy is also expressed in its view of the natural world. Nature is all things that have a physical essence that is forever moving and changing. Through movement, the natural world is expressed. Movement is not separate from natural objects. The movement of the natural world has many forms: increase and decrease; qualitative or metabolic change; birth and destruction; change in space, etc.
Aristotle's concept of the natural world also shows the oscillation between materialism and idealism. The natural world, according to him, is both the first matter, the basis of all existence, and also the shape (something brought from outside matter). Human perception is to perceive shapes, not the things themselves.
Aristotle's epistemology plays an important role in the history of ancient Greek philosophy. His cognitive theory is partly built on the basis of criticism of Plato's doctrine of "idea" and "recollection".
In his cognitive theory, Aristotle acknowledged the objective world as the object of perception, the source, experience and feeling. Nature is the first, knowledge is the second. Feelings play an important role in cognition, thanks to the feeling of the object, we have correct knowledge, experience and reason to understand the object. Here, Aristotle acknowledged the objectivity of the world.
Regarding the stages of perception, Aristotle recognized the sensory stage as the first stage; visual perception stage (for example, observation of solar and lunar eclipses with the naked eye); and rational cognition is the second stage, this stage requires generalization and abstraction to draw out the necessity of the phenomenon.
Aristotle's idealistic mistake here was to deify rational cognition, considering it as a function of the soul, of God.
However, in general Aristotle's epistemology contains elements of sensory and empiricism with materialist tendencies.
Aristotle also did profound research on issues of logic and calculus
dialectic. He understood logic as the science of proof, which distinguishes two types of inferences from the particular to the general (induction) and from the general to the particular (deduction). He also presented the laws of logic: the law of uniformity, the law of prohibiting contradictions in thinking, the law of eliminating the third. Aristotle also proposed a method of proving three paragraphs (syllogisms), etc.
Aristotle's dialectic, in addition to being expressed in concepts about natural objects and their movement, is also clearly shown in the explanation of the particular and the general. When criticizing Plato for separating "ideas" as the general from the sensible things as the particular, Aristotle tried to examine the general in inseparable unity with the particular. According to him, perceiving the common in the single is the essence of sensory perception.
Ethics was classified by Aristotle as an important science after philosophy. In ethics he was especially interested in the issue of virtue.
According to him, virtue is the best thing, the supreme benefit that all citizens should have. Human virtue is expressed in the concept of happiness. Society has many different concepts about morality, but, according to Aristotle, happiness must be associated with cognitive activities, with the desire to do good.
In short, although Aristotle's philosophy still has limitations and fluctuates between materialism and idealism, he still deserves to be the greatest mind among the great minds of ancient Greek philosophy. 